---
title: MIT 6.007 Signals and Systems Course Notes 1
date: 2025-01-24 14:00:00 +/-0000
categories: [Course, Notes]
tags: [course note, signals and systems, ee]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
author: fishyi
description: This notes contains the contents of lecture 1,2,3 of MIT 6.007 Signals and Systems course.
math: true
---

Visit [original course website](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/res-6-007-signals-and-systems-spring-2011/) for more details.

## Lecture 1: Introduction

### Signals

#### A Simple Definition

Functions of one or more independent variables.

#### Types of Signals

- Continuous-time signals
- Discrete-time signals
- One-dimensional signals
- Multi-dimensional signals

Examples:

Speech signal: continuous-time, one-dimensional

Image signal: continuous-time, two-dimensional

stock market index: discrete-time, one-dimensional

### Systems

#### A Simple Definition

How we process signals. Typically has an input and an output.

#### Types of Systems

- Linear/Non-linear systems
- Time-invariant/Time-varying systems
  
Focus more on Linear Time-invariant(LTI) systems.

#### Domains

Time domain and frequency domain.

## Lecture 2: Signals and Systems Part I

### Sinusoidal signal

#### Continuous-time

$$
x(t) = A\cos(\omega_0 t + \phi)
$$

##### Properties

- Periodic: $$T = \frac{2\pi}{\omega_0}$$
- Time-shift <=> Phase change
  
  A time shift of $$\Delta t$$ can generate a phase change of $$\Delta \phi$$ and vice versa satisfying the following equation:

  $$
  \omega_0\Delta t = \Delta \phi
  $$
- Odd($$\sin$$) and Even($$\cos$$)
- Different signals for different choice of $$\omega_0$$


#### Discrete-time

$$
x[n] = A\cos(\Omega_0 n + \phi)
$$

Due to the constraint that $$n \in \mathbb{Z}$$，some properties in continuous-time case do NOT hold.

##### Properties

- Periodic

  Holds only if when $$\Omega_0 = \frac{2\pi m}{N}, m \in \mathbb{Z}, N \in \mathbb{N}^{*}$$

- Time-shift => Phase-change

  A time shift of $$\Delta n$$ can generate a phase change of $$\Delta \phi$$ while the opposite does not always hold since $$\frac{\Delta \phi}{\Omega_0}$$ can not be guaranteed to be an integer.
  
- Odd($$\sin$$) and Even($$\cos$$)
- Identical signals for values of $$\Omega_0$$ separated by $$2\pi$$.

### Real Exponential

#### Continuous-time

$$
x(t) = C\text{e}^{at}, C,a \in \mathbb{R}
$$

Time-shift <=> Scale change

#### Discrete-time

$$
x[n] = C\alpha^n, C,\alpha \in \mathbb{R}
$$

Note that $$\alpha$$ can be negative here.

### Complex Exponential

#### Continuous-time

$$
x(t) = C\text{e}^{a t}, C,a \in \mathbb{C}
$$

Write $$C$$ in the polar form and $$a$$ in the rectangular coordinate form:

$$
C=|C|\text{e}^{j\theta}
$$

$$
a=r+j\omega_0
$$

We get:

$$
\begin{align}
x(t) &= |C|\text{e}^{(r+j\omega_0)t+j\theta} = |C|\text{e}^{rt}\text{e}^{j(\omega_0 t+\theta)} \notag \\
&= |C|\text{e}^{rt}\cos(\omega_0 t + \theta) + j|C|\text{e}^{rt}\sin(\omega_0 t + \theta) \notag
\end{align}
$$

#### Discrete-time


$$
x[n] = C\alpha^{n}, C,\alpha \in \mathbb{C}
$$

Write $$C, \alpha$$ in the polar form:

$$
C=|C|\text{e}^{j\theta}
$$

$$
\alpha=|\alpha|\text{e}^{j\Omega_0}
$$

We get:

$$
\begin{align}
x[n] &= |C|\text{e}^{j\theta}(|\alpha|\text{e}^{j\Omega_0})^n = |C||\alpha|^n \text{e}^{j(\Omega_0 n+\theta)} \notag \\
&= |C||\alpha|^n \cos(\Omega_0 n + \theta) + j|C||\alpha|^n\sin(\Omega_0 n + \theta) \notag
\end{align}
$$

## Lecture 3: Signals and Systems Part II

### Unit Step and Unit Impulse

#### Discrete Form

$$
\begin{align}
u[n] &= \begin{cases}
1 & n \geq 0 \\
0 & n < 0
\end{cases} \notag \\
\delta[n] &= \begin{cases}
1 & n=0 \\
0 & n \neq 0
\end{cases} \notag
\end{align}
$$

Unit Impulse can be regarded as taking the first difference of unit step, i.e. $$\delta[n] = u[n] - u[n-1]$$, thus we can reconstruct the unit step from the unit impulse by taking the summation of the unit impulse: $$u[n]=\sum_{k=0}^{\infty}\delta[n-k]= \sum_{m=-\infty}^n \delta[m]$$.

#### Continuous Form

$$
\begin{align}
u(t) &= \begin{cases}
1 & t > 0 \\
0 & t < 0
\end{cases} \notag
\end{align}
$$

How to deal with $$t=0$$ case?

Use an approximation:

$$
\begin{align}
u_{\Delta}(t) &= \begin{cases}
0 & t < 0 \\
\frac{t}{\Delta} & 0 \leq t < \Delta \\
1 & t \geq \Delta 
\end{cases} \notag
\end{align}
$$

Thus we can define $$u(t)$$ as the limit of its approximation when $$\Delta$$ goes to zero.

Also we can define unit impulse in the continuous form by first taking derivative of $$u_{\Delta}(t)$$ and then let $$\Delta$$ goes to zero. The $$u(t)$$ defined below satisfies that the area around zero ($$0*\infty$$) equals 1.

$$
\begin{align}
\delta(t) &= \begin{cases}
\infty & t=0 \\
0 & t \neq 0
\end{cases} \notag
\end{align}
$$

We can reconstruct unit step function by taking the integral of unit impulse:

$$
\delta(t) = \frac{\text{d}}{\text{d}t}u(t)
$$

$$
u(t) = \int_{-\infty}^t \delta(\tau) \text{d}\tau
$$

### Systems, Interconnections of systems and Properties of systems

#### Systems

A system is a mapping from an input signal to an output signal. The mapping is usually denoted by a box with an arrow pointing to the input and another arrow pointing to the output.

#### Interconnections of systems

We can connect systems in series or in parallel.

##### Series

The output of one system is the input of the other.

##### Parallel

The output of the parallel system is the sum of the outputs of the two systems.

##### Feedback

The output of the system 1 is fed back by system 2 to the input.

#### Properties of systems

##### Memoryless

A system is memoryless if the output at time $$t$$ depends only on the input at time $$t$$.

Example: Squarer(yes), Unit delay(no).

##### Invertibility

A system is invertible if there exists another system that can undo the effect of the first system (to make up an identity system together).

Example: Differentiator is the inverse system of integrator, thus integrator is invertible. However the opposite does NOT hold since there exists an additional const $$C$$ when you do the integration after differentiation.

##### Causality

A system is causal if the output at time $$t$$ depends only on the input at time $$t$$ and before.

Example: $$y[n] = x[n] + x[n-1]$$ is causal, While $$y[n] = \frac{1}{3}(x[n-1]+x[n]+x[n+1])$$ isn't.

##### Stability

A system is stable if the output is bounded for all bounded inputs.

Example:  $$y(t) = \int_{-\infty}^tx(\tau)\text{d}\tau$$ isn't.

##### Time Invariance

$$x(t)\to y(t)$$, then $$x(t-t_0)\to y(t-t_0)$$.

##### Linearity

$$x_1(t)\to y_1(t)$$, $$x_2(t)\to y_2(t)$$, then $$ax_1(t)+bx_2(t)\to ay_1(t)+by_2(t)$$.
