---
title: MIT 6.007 Signals and Systems Course Notes 2
date: 2025-02-02 14:00:00 +/-0000
categories: [Course, Notes]
tags: [course note, signals and systems, ee]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
author: fishyi
description: This notes contains the contents of lecture 4,5,6 of MIT 6.007 Signals and Systems course.
math: true
---

Visit [original course website](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/res-6-007-signals-and-systems-spring-2011/) for more details.

## Lecture 4: Convolution

### How to decompose signals?

Decompose input signals into a linear combination of basic signals.

If we have a LTI System and the response of basic signals, it will be easy to compute the response of the input signals.

- Delayed Impulses -- Convolution
- Complex Exponentials -- Fourier Analysis

### Discrete-time Case

#### Decomposition

$$
x[n] = \sum_{k=-\infty}^{+\infty} x[k] \delta[n-k]
$$

#### Linear System

$$
y[n] = \sum_{k=-\infty}^{+\infty} x[k] h_k[n]
$$

$$
\delta[n-k] \rightarrow h_k[n]
$$

#### If Time-Invariant

$$
h_k[n] = h[n-k]
$$

- Convolution Sum

$$
y[n] = \sum_{k=-\infty}^{+\infty} x[k] h[n-k] = x[n] * h[n]
$$

### Continuous-time Case

#### Decomposition

$$
x(t) = \int_{-\infty}^{+\infty} x(\tau) \delta(t-\tau) \mathrm{d}\tau
$$

#### LTI System

Similarly, we have the convolution integral here:

$$
y(t) = \int_{-\infty}^{+\infty} x(\tau) h(t-\tau) \mathrm{d}\tau = x(t) * h(t)
$$

## Lecture 5: Properties of LTI Systems

In this lecture, the continuous-time case and the discrete-time case are similar. Thus we will use notations in a less strict way. Sometimes only continuous-time case will be discussed.

### Commutative, Associative, Distributive Properties

- Commutative

$$
x * h = h * x
$$

We can interchange the roles of input and impulse response for LTI systems.

- Associative

$$
x * (h_1 * h_2) = (x * h_1) * h_2
$$

We can write $$x * h_1 * h_2$$ unambiguously.

Associative property combined with the commutative property implies that the output of cascaded LTI systems is independent of the order in which the systems are cascaded.

- Distributive over addition

$$
x * (h_1 + h_2) = x * h_1 + x * h_2
$$

A parallel combination can be collapsed into a single system whose impulse response is the sum of the two individual ones.

### A Useful Fact for Linear Systems (Zero in, Zero out)

For a linear system, if the input is zero for all $$t$$, then the output is also zero for all $$t$$.

### Other properties

#### Memory

If an LTI system is memoryless, then the impulse response must be a scaled impulse.

Proof:

$$y(t) = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} x(\tau)h(t-\tau)\mathrm{d}\tau$$ relies only on the value of $$x(\tau)$$ at $$\tau = t$$. Thus, $$h$$ is non-zero only at $$\tau = t$$, which indicates that $$h(t) = k\delta(t)$$.

#### Invertibility

If an LTI system with impulse response $$h$$ is invertible, the inverse system has the impulse response $$h^{-1}$$ that satisfies $$h * h^{-1} = h^{-1} * h = \delta$$.

#### Stability

For LTI systems an equivalent condition to stability is that the impulse response be absolutely summable (discrete time) or absolutely integrable (continuous time).

#### Causality

If an LTI system is causal, then its impulse response must be zero for t (or n) < 0; furthermore, if the impulse response has this property, then the system is guaranteed to be causal.

Proof:

For the first part, use the fact that zero input leads to zero output for linear systems. For the second part, a simple way to prove this is by doing integration(summation) from minus infinity to t (n) instead of from minus infinity to plus infinity.

### Operation Definition of Impulse

Focus on how it behaves in convolution instead of what it looks like.

Impulse function can be defined as something that satisfies the following when doing convolution:

$$
x * \delta = x
$$

The k-th order derivative of the impulse function $$u_{k}(t)$$ is defined as:

$$
x(t) * u_{k}(t) = \frac{\mathrm{d}^k x(t)}{\mathrm{d}t^k}
$$

The m-th order integral of the impulse function $$u_{-m}(t)$$ is defined as:

$$
x(t) * u_{-m}(t) = \text{m-th running integral}
$$

Facts:

$$
u_{0}(t) = \delta(t)
$$

$$
u_{-1}(t) = u(t)
$$

$$
u_{k}(t) * u_{l}(t) = u_{k+l}(t)
$$
